Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Special pages Donate Create account Create account Contributions Top Summary Nature of innovation and change Social change Earth at the end of the 20th century Wars and politics Culture and entertainment Toggle Culture and entertainment subsection . Music Film, television and theatre Video games Art and architecture Sport Science Toggle Science subsection Mathematics Physics Astronomy Agriculture Biology Medicine .. Notable diseases Energy and the environment Engineering and technology Toggle Engineering and technology subsection Space exploration Religion Economics See also References Sources Further reading External links Afrikaans Alemannisch nglisc Aragons Arpetan Asturianu Azrbaycanca Basa Bali Bnlmg Basa Banyumasan Bosanski Brezhoneg Catal Cebuano etina Cymraeg Dansk Davvismegiella Deutsch Eesti Emilin e rumagnl Espaol Esperanto Estremeu Euskara Fiji Hindi Froyskt Franais Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gidhlig Galego Hakkng Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua slenska Italiano Jawa Kernowek Kiswahili Kotava Kurd Latgau Latina Latvieu Ltzebuergesch Lietuvi Ligure Limburgs Lingla Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala La .lojban. Lombard Magyar Mori Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mngdngng Mirands Nhuatl Nederlands Nedersaksies Napulitano Nordfriisk Norsk bokml Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Novial Occitan Ozbekcha Papiamentu Plattdtsch Polski Portugus Romn Rumantsch Runa Simi Scots Seeltersk Sesotho sa Leboa Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenina Slovenina lnski Soomaaliga srpski Srpskohrvatski Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog Taqbaylit tatara Trke Trkmene Vneto Ting Vit Volapk Vro Walon Winaray Zazaki Zeuws emaitka Toli Article Read Edit View history What links here Related changes Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Edit interlanguage links Expand all Download as PDF Printable version Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item SmallStandardLarge StandardWide AutomaticLightDark 19th century 20th century 21st century 1900s 1910s 1920s 1930s 1940s 1950s 1960s 1970s 1980s 1990s v t e RussoJapanese War, between the Russian Empire and the Empire of Japan during and over rival imperial ambitions in Manchuria and the Korean Empire. Russian Revolution of , a wave of mass political and social unrest then began to spread across the vast areas of the Russian Empire. The unrest was directed primarily against the Tsar, the nobility, and the ruling class. It included worker strikes, peasant unrest, and military mutinies. Sinking of the Titanic, RMS Titanic sank on April in the North Atlantic Ocean. The largest ocean liner in service at the time, Titanic was four days into her maiden voyage from Southampton, England, to New York City, with an estimated , people on board when she struck an iceberg at ships timea on April. The Armenian, Assyrian and Greek genocide were the systematic destruction, mass murder and expulsion of the Armenians, Assyrians and Greeks in the Ottoman Empire during World War I, spearheaded by the ruling Committee of Union and Progress CUP. The Alliance of Eight Nations AustroHungarian Empire, French Republic, German Empire, Kingdom of Italy, Empire of Japan, Russian Empire, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland and United States of America formed in to invade the Qing China represented the club of great powers in the early 20th century. Rising nationalism and increasing national awareness were among the many causes of World War I , the first of two wars to involve many major world powers including Germany, France, Italy, Japan, RussiaUSSR, the British Empire and the United States. At the time, it was said by many to be the war to end all wars. The Arab Revolt of was an armed uprising against the Ottoman Empire done by the Arabs in agreement with the British Empire. The revolt was led by Sharif Hussein bin Ali who was promised by Henry McMahon, the British High Commissioner in Egypt, that in exchange for fighting the Ottoman Empire, Sharif Hussein would gain control over all Arab lands under the Ottoman Empire. A promise the British Empire did not honor. During World War I, in the Russian Revolution of , years of Tsarist reign were ended and the Bolsheviks, under the leadership of Vladimir Lenin, established the worlds first Communist state. The end of World War I saw the collapse of the central powers, the German Empire, the AustrianHungarian Empire, the Kingdom of Bulgaria, and the Ottoman Empire into several independent sovereign states throughout Central Europe, the Balkans, and the Middle East. After gaining political rights in the United States and much of Europe in the first part of the century, and with the advent of new birth control techniques, women became more independent throughout the century. Industrial warfare greatly increased in its scale and complexity during the first half of the 20th century. Notable developments included chemical warfare, the introduction of military aviation and the widespread use of submarines. The introduction of nuclear warfare in the mid20th century marked the definite transition to modern warfare. The Revolutions of occurred during and World War I inspired by the Russian Revolution which saw many political changes in Europe and in Asia. The Osage Murders of were a series of killings of members of the Native American Osage Nation, who were the richest people per capita in the world at that time. The Tulsa Race Massacre, was a racist anti black terrorist attack in the Greenwood District in Tulsa, Oklahoma, which was home to many successful and wealthy Black Americans. The attack was perpetrated by white residents and local white deputies. The perpetrators were armed by local government officials. The Beer Hall Putsch failed coup dtat by Nazi Party leader Adolf Hitler. The Great Depression in the 1930s led to the rise of Fascism especially Nazism in Europe. Holodomor, manmade famine in Soviet Ukraine from to that killed millions of Ukrainians. Night of the Long Knives, purge that took place in Nazi Germany from June to July . The to Long March, military retreat by the Chinese Red Army and Chinese Communist Party CCP from advancing Kuomintang forces. A violent civil war broke out in Spain in when General Francisco Franco rebelled against the Second Spanish Republic. Many consider this war as a testing battleground for World War II, as the fascist armies bombed some Spanish territories. Great Purge, political purge in the Soviet Union that took place from and . The Kristallnacht, pogrom against Jews carried out by the Nazi Partys Sturmabteilung SA and Schutzstaffel SS paramilitary forces World War II became the deadliest conflict in human history involving primarily the axis, Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, and the Empire of Japan against the allies, China, France, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and the United States. Many atrocities occurred, particularly the Holocaust killing approximately million victims. It ended with the atomic bombings on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in Japan. The two world wars led to efforts to increase international cooperation, notably through the founding of the League of Nations after World War I, and its successor, the United Nations, after World War II. The creation of Israel in , a Jewish state in the Middle East, at the end of the British Mandate for Palestine, fueled many conflicts between Israelis and Palestinians in addition to regional conflicts. These were also influenced by the vast oil fields in many of the other countries of the predominantly Arab region. In The Nakba was, according to several historians, a targeted ethnic cleansing campaign against Arabs in Palestine perpetrated by Jewish Militias under Plan Delta, a plan ordered by BenGurion. The campaign utilized methods of intimidation, violent attacks, and the destruction of several Arab villages. After the Soviet Unions involvement in World War II, communism became a major force in global politics, notably in Eastern Europe, China, Indochina and Cuba, where communist parties gained nearabsolute power. The Cold War involved an arms race and increasing competition between the two major players in the world the Soviet Union and the United States. This competition included the development and improvement of nuclear weapons and space technology. This led to the proxy wars with the Western bloc, including wars in Korea and Vietnam . The Soviet authorities caused the deaths of millions of their own citizens to eliminate domestic opposition. More than million people passed through the Gulag, with a further million being exiled to remote areas of the Soviet Union. Nationalist movements in the Indian subcontinent led to the independence and partition of Jawaharlal Nehruled India and Muhammad Ali Jinnahled Pakistan, although would lead to conflicts between the two nations such as border and territorial disputes. After a long period of civil wars and conflicts with western powers, Chinas last imperial dynasty ended in . The resulting republic was replaced, after another civil war, by the communist Peoples Republic of China in . At the end of the 20th century, though still ruled by a communist party, Chinas economic system had largely transformed to capitalism. Mahatma Gandhis nonviolence and Indian independence movement against the British Empire influenced many political movements around the world, including the civil rights movement in the United States, and freedom movements in South Africa against apartheid challenging racial segregation The end of colonialism led to the independence of many African and Asian countries. During the Cold War, many of these aligned with the United States, the USSR, or China for defense. Pozna protests, the first of several massive protests against the communist government of the Polish Peoples Republic. Hungarian Revolution of , attempted countrywide revolution against the government of the Hungarian Peoples Republic and the policies caused by the governments subordination to the Soviet Union USSR. Mao Zedongs radical policy of modernization leads to the Great Chinese Famine causing the death of tens of millions of Chinese peasants between and . It is thought to be the largest famine in human history. Cuban Missile Crisis, day confrontation between the governments of the United States and the Soviet Union, when American deployments of nuclear missiles in Italy and Turkey were matched by Soviet deployments of nuclear missiles in Cuba. The Vietnam War caused two million deaths, changed the dynamics between the Eastern and Western Blocs, and altered global NorthSouth relations. The SixDay War, fought between Israel and a coalition of Arab states, primarily Egypt, Syria, and Jordan. The Prague Spring, period of political liberalization and mass protest in the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic. Polish protests, protests were sparked by a sudden increase in the prices of food and other everyday items while wages remained stagnant. Yom Kippur War, fought from to October between Israel and a coalition of Arab states led by Egypt and Syria. Iranian revolution, series of events that culminated in the overthrow of the Pahlavi dynasty in . The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan caused an estimated two million deaths and contributed to the dissolution of the Soviet Union along with complete political turmoil in Afghanistan36 The Martial law in Poland, The government of the Polish Peoples Republic drastically restricted everyday life by introducing martial law and a military junta in an attempt to counter political opposition, in particular the Solidarity movement. The Chernobyl disaster, worst nuclear disaster in history. Some Ukrainians viewed the Chernobyl disaster as another attempt by Russians to destroy them, comparable to the Holodomor. The revolutions of released Eastern and Central Europe from Soviet control. Soon thereafter, the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia dissolved the former having many states seceded and the latter violently over several years, into successor states, with many rife with ethnic nationalism. Meanwhile, East Germany and West Germany were reunified in . The Tiananmen Square protests of , culminating in the deaths of hundreds of civilian protesters and thousands of wounded, were a series of demonstrations in and near Tiananmen Square in Beijing, China. Led mainly by students and intellectuals, the protests occurred in a year that saw the collapse of a number of communist governments around the world. Soviet coup attempt, a failed attempt by hardliners of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union CPSU to forcibly seize control of the country from Mikhail Gorbachev, who was Soviet President and General Secretary of the CPSU at the time. Bosnian War, international armed conflict that took place in Bosnia and Herzegovina between and . The Rwandan genocide, over a span of around days, members of the Tutsi ethnic group, as well as some moderate Hutu and Twa, were systematically killed by Hutu militias. European integration began in earnest in the 1950s, and eventually led to the European Union, a political and economic union that comprised countries at the end of the 20th century. As the century began, Paris was the artistic capital of the world, where both French and foreign writers, composers and visual artists gathered. By the middle of the century New York City had become the artistic capital of the world. Theater, films, music and the media had a major influence on fashion and trends in all aspects of life. As many films and much music originate from the United States, American culture spread rapidly over the world. saw the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II, an iconic figure of the century. Visual culture became more dominant not only in films but in comics and television as well. During the century a new skilled understanding of narrativist imagery was developed. Computer games and internet surfing became new and popular form of entertainment during the last years of the century. In literature, science fiction, fantasy with welldeveloped fictional worlds, rich in detail, and alternative history fiction gained popularity. Detective fiction gained popularity in the interwar period. In the United States in Grove Press published Tropic of Cancer a novel by Henry Miller redefining pornography and censorship in publishing in America. Igor Stravinsky revolutionized classical composition. In the 1920s, Arnold Schoenberg developed the twelvetone technique, which became widely influential on 20thcentury composers. In classical music, composition branched out into many completely new domains, including dodecaphony, aleatoric chance music, and minimalism. Tango was created in Argentina and became extremely popular in the rest of the Americas and Europe. Blues and jazz music became popularized during the 1910s, 1920s and 1930s in the United States. Bebop develops as a form of jazz in the 1940s. Country music develops in the 1920s and 1930s in the United States. Blues and country went on to influence rock and roll in the 1950s, which along with folk music, increased in popularity with the British Invasion of the midtolate 1960s. Rock soon branched into many different genres, including folk rock, heavy metal, punk rock, and alternative rock and became the dominant genre of popular music. This was challenged with the rise of hip hop in the 1980s and 1990s. Other genres such as house, techno, reggae, and soul all developed during the latter half of the century and went through various periods of popularity. Synthesizers began to be employed widely in music and crossed over into the mainstream with new wave music in the 1980s. Electronic instruments have been widely deployed in all manners of popular music and has led to the development of such genres as house, synthpop, electronic dance music, and industrial. Julie Andrews, Harry Belafonte, Humphrey Bogart, Marlon Brando, James Cagney, Charlie Chaplin, Sean Connery, Tom Cruise, James Dean, Robert De Niro, Harrison Ford, Clark Gable, Cary Grant, Audrey Hepburn, Katharine Hepburn, Bruce Lee, Marilyn Monroe, Paul Newman, Jack Nicholson, Al Pacino, Sidney Poitier, Meryl Streep, Elizabeth Taylor, James Stewart, Jane Fonda and John Wayne are among the most popular Hollywood stars of the 20th century. Madhubala, JeanPaul Belmondo, Karel Roden, Sean Connery, Marcello Mastroianni, Salah Zulfikar, Marlene Dietrich, Brigitte Bardot, Omar Sharif, Catherine Deneuve, Alain Delon, Soad Hosny, Fernanda Montenegro, Sophie Marceau, Fatima Rushdi, Amitabh Bachchan, Jean Gabin, Toshiro Mifune, Shoukry Sarhan, Lars Mikkelsen, Sophia Loren, Youssef Wahbi, Claudia Cardinale, Klaus Kinski, Grard Depardieu, Max von Sydow, Faten Hamama, Rutger Hauer and Toni Servillo are among the most popular movie stars of the 20th century. Sergei Eisenstein, D. W. Griffith, Cecil B. DeMille, Frank Capra, Howard Hawks, John Ford, Orson Welles, Martin Scorsese, John Huston, Alfred Hitchcock, Akira Kurosawa, Spike Lee, Ingmar Bergman, Federico Fellini, Walt Disney, Stanley Kubrick, Steven Spielberg, Sergey Parajanov, Ridley Scott, Woody Allen, Quentin Tarantino, James Cameron, William Friedkin, Ezz ElDine Zulficar and George Lucas are among the most important and popular filmmakers of the 20th century. In theater, sometimes referred to as Broadway in New York City, playwrights such as Eugene ONeill, Samuel Beckett, Edward Albee, Arthur Miller and Tennessee Williams introduced innovative language and ideas to the idiom. In musical theater, figures such as Rodgers and Hammerstein, Lerner and Loewe, Mohammed Karim, and Irving Berlin had an enormous impact on both film and the culture in general. Modern dance is born in America as a rebellion against centuriesold European ballet. Dancers and choreographers Alvin Ailey, Isadora Duncan, Vaslav Nijinsky, Ruth St. Denis, Mahmoud Reda, Martha Graham, Jos Limn, Doris Humphrey, Merce Cunningham, and Paul Taylor redefined movement, struggling to bring it back to its natural roots and along with Jazz, created a solely American art form. Alvin Ailey is credited with popularizing modern dance and revolutionizing AfricanAmerican participation in 20thcentury concert dance. His company gained the nickname Cultural Ambassador to the World because of its extensive international touring. Aileys choreographic masterpiece Revelations is believed to be the best known and most often seen modern dance performance. While already conceptualized in the 1940s50s, video games only emerged as an industry during the 1970s, and then exploded into social and cultural phenomena in the late 1970s and early 1980s with the golden age of arcade video games, with notable releases such as Taitos Space Invaders, Atari, Inc.s Asteroids, Nintendos Donkey Kong, Namcos PacMan and Galaga, Konamis Frogger, Capcoms and Segas Zaxxon, the worldwide success of Nintendos Super Mario Bros. and the release in the 1990s of Sony PlayStation console, the first one to break the record of million units sold, with Gran Turismo being the systems best selling video game. Video game design becomes a discipline. Some game designers in this century stand out for their work, such as Shigeru Miyamoto, Hideo Kojima, Sid Meier and Will Wright. The art world experienced the development of new styles and explorations such as fauvism, expressionism, Dadaism, cubism, de stijl, surrealism, abstract expressionism, color field, pop art, minimal art, lyrical abstraction, and conceptual art. The modern art movement revolutionized art and culture and set the stage for both Modernism and its counterpart postmodern art as well as other contemporary art practices. Art Nouveau began as a form of architecture and design but fell out of fashion after World War I. The style was dynamic and inventive but unsuited to the depression of the Great War. In Europe, modern architecture departed from the decorated styles of the Victorian era. Streamlined forms inspired by machines became commonplace, enabled by developments in building materials and technologies. Before World War II, many European architects moved to the United States, where modern architecture continued to develop. The automobile increased the mobility of people in the Western countries in the earlytomidcentury, and in many other places by the end of the 20th century. City design throughout most of the West became focused on transport via car. The popularity of sport increased considerablyboth as an activity for all and as entertainment, particularly on television. The modern Olympic Games, first held in , grew to include tens of thousands of athletes in dozens of sports. The FIFA World Cup was first held in and was held every four years after World War II. American League Baseball was formed in and in , both National and American agreed to play in the first World Series with over , in attendance. Boxing, also known as Prize Fighting became popular over this decade although bareknuckle fighting was still popular. New areas of physics, like special relativity, general relativity, and quantum mechanics, were developed during the first half of the century. In the process, the internal structure of atoms came to be clearly understood, followed by the discovery of elementary particles. It was found that all the known forces can be traced to only four fundamental interactions. It was discovered further that two forces, electromagnetism and weak interaction, can be merged in the electroweak interaction, leaving only three different fundamental interactions. Discovery of nuclear reactions, in particular nuclear fusion, finally revealed the source of solar energy. Radiocarbon dating was invented, and became a powerful technique for determining the age of prehistoric animals and plants as well as historical objects. A much better understanding of the evolution of the universe was achieved, its age about . billion years was determined, and the Big Bang theory on its origin was proposed and generally accepted. The age of the Solar System, including Earth, was determined, and it turned out to be much older than believed earlier more than billion years, rather than the million years suggested by Lord Kelvin in . The planets of the Solar System and their moons were closely observed via numerous space probes. Pluto was discovered in on the edge of the Solar System, although in the early 21st century, it was reclassified as a dwarf planet instead of a planet proper, leaving eight planets. No trace of life was discovered on any of the other planets orbiting the Sun or elsewhere in the universe, although it remained undetermined whether some forms of primitive life might exist, or might have existed, somewhere in the Solar System. Extrasolar planets were observed for the first time. Norman Borlaug fathered the Green Revolution, the set of research technology transfer initiatives occurring between and the late 1960s that increased agricultural production in parts of the world, beginning most markedly in the late 1960s, and is often credited with saving over a billion people worldwide from starvation. Genetics was unanimously accepted and significantly developed. The structure of DNA was determined in by James Watson, Francis Crick, Rosalind Franklin48 and Maurice Wilkins, following by developing techniques which allow to read DNA sequences and culminating in starting the Human Genome Project not finished in the 20th century and cloning the first mammal in . The role of sexual reproduction in evolution was understood, and bacterial conjugation was discovered. The convergence of various sciences for the formulation of the modern evolutionary synthesis produced between and , providing a widely accepted account of evolution. Placebocontrolled, randomized, blinded clinical trials became a powerful tool for testing new medicines. Antibiotics drastically reduced mortality from bacterial diseases. A vaccine was developed for polio, ending a worldwide epidemic. Effective vaccines were also developed for a number of other serious infectious diseases, including influenza, diphtheria, pertussis whooping cough, tetanus, measles, mumps, rubella German measles, chickenpox, hepatitis A, and hepatitis B. Epidemiology and vaccination led to the eradication of the smallpox virus in humans. Xrays became a powerful diagnostic tool for a wide spectrum of diseases, from bone fractures to cancer. In the 1960s, computerized tomography was invented. Other important diagnostic tools developed were sonography and magnetic resonance imaging. Development of vitamins virtually eliminated scurvy and other vitamindeficiency diseases from industrialized societies. New psychiatric drugs were developed. These include antipsychotics for treating hallucinations and delusions, and antidepressants for treating depression. The role of tobacco smoking in the causation of cancer and other diseases was proven during the 1950s see British Doctors Study. New methods for cancer treatment, including chemotherapy, radiation therapy, and immunotherapy, were developed. As a result, cancer could often be cured or placed in remission. The development of blood typing and blood banking made blood transfusion safe and widely available. The invention and development of immunosuppressive drugs and tissue typing made organ and tissue transplantation a clinical reality. New methods for heart surgery were developed, including pacemakers and artificial hearts. Cocaine and heroin were widely illegalized after being found to be addictive and destructive. Psychoactive drugs such as LSD and MDMA were discovered and subsequently prohibited in many countries. Prohibition of drugs caused a growth in the black market drug industry, and expanded enforcement led to a larger prison population in some countries. Contraceptive drugs were developed, which reduced population growth rates in industrialized countries, as well as decreased the taboo of premarital sex throughout many western countries. The development of medical insulin during the 1920s helped raise the life expectancy of diabetics to three times of what it had been earlier. Vaccines, hygiene and clean water improved health and decreased mortality rates, especially among infants and the young. An influenza pandemic, Spanish Flu, killed anywhere from to million people between and . A new viral disease, called the Human Immunodeficiency Virus, or HIV, arose in Africa and subsequently killed millions of people throughout the world. HIV leads to a syndrome called Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome, or AIDS. Treatments for HIV remained inaccessible to many people living with AIDS and HIV in developing countries, and a cure has yet to be discovered. Because of increased life spans, the prevalence of cancer, Alzheimers disease, Parkinsons disease, and other diseases of old age increased slightly. Changes in food production, along with sedentary lifestyles due to laborsaving devices and the increase in home entertainment, contributed to an epidemic of obesity, at first in the rich countries, but by the end of the 20th century spreading to the developing world. Fossil fuels and nuclear power were the dominant forms of energy sources. Widespread use of petroleum in industryboth as a chemical precursor to plastics and as a fuel for the automobile and airplaneled to the geopolitical importance of petroleum resources. The Middle East, home to many of the worlds oil deposits, became a center of geopolitical and military tension throughout the latter half of the century. For example, oil was a factor in Japans decision to go to war against the United States in , and the oil cartel, OPEC, used an oil embargo of sorts in the wake of the Yom Kippur War in the 1970s. The increase in fossil fuel consumption also fueled a major scientific controversy over its effect on air pollution, global warming, and global climate change. Pesticides, herbicides and other toxic chemicals accumulated in the environment, including in the bodies of humans and other animals. Population growth and worldwide deforestation diminished the quality of the environment. In the last third of the century, concern about humankinds impact on the Earths environment made environmentalism popular. In many countries, especially in Europe, the movement was channeled into politics through Green parties. Increasing awareness of global warming began in the 1980s, commencing decades of social and political debate. Basic home appliances including washing machines, clothes dryers, furnaces, exercise machines, dishwashers, refrigerators, freezers, electric stoves and vacuum cleaners became popular from the 1920s through the 1950s. Radios were popularized as a form of entertainment during the 1920s, followed by television during the 1950s. The first airplane, the Wright Flyer, was flown in . With the engineering of the faster jet engine in the 1940s, mass air travel became commercially viable. The assembly line made mass production of the automobile viable. By the end of the 20th century, billions of people had automobiles for personal transportation. The combination of the automobile, motor boats and air travel allowed for unprecedented personal mobility. In western nations, motor vehicle accidents became the greatest cause of death for young people. However, expansion of divided highways reduced the death rate. The triode tube was invented, laying the foundation for amplification and switching technologies that led to siliconbased solidstate transistors, which revolutionized modern electronics. Air conditioning of buildings became common New materials, most notably stainless steel, Velcro, silicone, teflon, and plastics such as polystyrene, PVC, polyethylene, and nylon came into widespread use for many various applications. These materials typically have tremendous performance gains in strength, temperature, chemical resistance, or mechanical properties over those known prior to the 20th century. Aluminum became an inexpensive metal and became second only to iron in use. Thousands of chemicals were developed for industrial processing and home use. Digital computers came into use, they greatly increased productivity and paved the way for the Internet, which revolutionized global communication and information sharing. The Space Race between the United States and the Soviet Union gave a peaceful outlet to the political and military tensions of the Cold War, leading to the first human spaceflight with the Soviet Unions Vostok mission in , and mans first landing on another worldthe Moonwith Americas Apollo mission in . Later, the first space station was launched by the Soviet space program. The United States developed the first reusable spacecraft system with the Space Shuttle program, first launched in . As the century ended, a permanent crewed presence in space was being founded with the ongoing construction of the International Space Station. In addition to human spaceflight, uncrewed space probes became a practical and relatively inexpensive form of exploration. The first orbiting space probe, Sputnik , was launched by the Soviet Union in . Over time, a massive system of artificial satellites was placed into orbit around Earth. These satellites greatly advanced navigation, communications, military intelligence, geology, climate, and numerous other fields. Also, by the end of the 20th century, uncrewed probes had visited or flown by the Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, Neptune, and various asteroids and comets, with Voyager being the farthest manufactured object from Earth at , billion kilometers away from Earth as of September , and together with Voyager both carrying The Voyager Golden Record containing sounds, music and greetings in languages as well as images of nature, human advancement, space and society. The Hubble Space Telescope, launched in , greatly expanded our understanding of the Universe and brought brilliant images to TV and computer screens around the world. The Global Positioning System, a series of satellites that allow landbased receivers to determine their exact location, was developed and deployed. 1900s A number of related revival movements mark the start of Pentecostalism. Aleister Crowley dictates The Book of the Law, the foundational text of Thelema. The Soviet Union establishes a doctrine of state atheism. Mustafa Kemal Pasha abolishes the Islamic Caliphate, in favor of secularism. This marks the last widely recognized Muslim Caliphate. Wallace Fard Muhammad founds the Nation of Islam. The Seventh Lambeth Conference allows for the possibility of birth control within Anglicanism, the first example of a modern Christian church supporting such a position. 1940s Wicca is formalized by Gerald Gardner and Doreen Valiente. 1950s Sayyid Qutb articulates Qutbism, a violent variety of Islamism that would later become foundational to jihadist ideology. Maharishi Mahesh Yogi begins to teach Transcendental Meditation. L. Ron Hubbard founds the Church of Scientology, which has a unique cosmology based on science fiction and his older system of Dianetics. B. R. Ambedkar launches the Dalit Buddhist movement. The charismatic movement starts within Anglicanism, quickly spreading to other Christian sects. The Second Vatican Council is held, resulting in significant changes in the Catholic Church. 1970s New Age beliefs and practices are popularized. In Shia Islam, the Islamic Revolution establishes a theocratic state within Iran. AlQaeda, a network of Islamic extremists, is founded among Arab members of the Afghan mujahideen. It engages in a number of terror attacks throughout the 1990s, leading up to the September attacks in . Falun Gong, a Chinese new religious movement dating to the early 1990s, begins to be persecuted by the Chinese government. The Great Depression was a worldwide economic slowdown that lasted throughout the early 1930s. The Soviet Union implemented a series of fiveyear plans for industrialization and economic development. Most countries abandoned the gold standard for their currency. The Bretton Woods system involved currencies being pegged to the United States dollar after the system collapsed in most major currencies had a floating exchange rate. Economics was divided into two general economic schools Keynesian and neoclassical The 1970s energy crisis occurred when the Western world, particularly the United States, Canada, Western Europe, Australia, and New Zealand, faced substantial petroleum shortages as well as elevated prices. The two worst crises of this period were the oil crisis and the energy crisis, when, respectively, the Yom Kippur War and the Iranian Revolution triggered interruptions in Middle Eastern oil exports. Modern history portal 19th Century 21st Century 20thcentury inventions Death rates in the 20th century Infectious disease in the 20th century Modern art Short twentieth century Timelines of modern history List of 20thcentury women artists List of notable 20thcentury writers List of battles List of stories set in a future now in the past Bikos, Konstantin. When Did the 21st Century Start?. Time and Date. Retrieved Jan . The 21st Century and the 3rd Millennium When Did They Begin?. United States Naval Observatory. Archived from the original on . Retrieved . Lutz, Wolfgang Sanderson, Warren C. Scherbov, Sergei , Lutz, Wolfgang Scherbov, Sergei eds., The End of World Population Growth, The End of World Population Growth in the 21st Century, Routledge, doi10., ISBN , retrieved World Population by Year Worldometer. www.worldometers.info. Retrieved . Wilson, E.O., The Future of Life ISBN . See also Leakey, Richard, The Sixth Extinction Patterns of Life and the Future of Humankind, ISBN The Sixth Extinction The Most Recent Extinctions. Archived from the original on . Ferguson, Niall . Empire The rise and demise of the British world order and the lessons for global power. New York Basic Books. ISBN . Delaney, Tim. Pop Culture An Overview. Philosophy Now. Retrieved September . Bell, P. Bell, R. . Americanization Political and cultural examples from the perspective of Americanized Australia PDF. American Studies. Retrieved September . Malchow, Howard . Special Relations The Americanization of Britain?. Stanford University Press. ISBN . Djukanovic, Bojka . Nordic, Central, and Southeastern Europe . Rowman Littlefield. p. . ISBN . Most of the countries presented in this book had communist regimes until and have been undergoing the difficult transition to democracy and freemarket economies. Fleegler, Robert L. Theodore G. Bilbo and the Decline of Public Racism, Archived at the Wayback Machine. Retrieved December Zadey, Siddhesh . Constitution Day Do We Truly Know the Real Ambedkar?. TheQuint. Retrieved . Vundru, Raja Sekhar . Ambedkar and political reservation. The Indian Express. Retrieved . Barry, John M. November . How the Horrific Flu Spread Across America. Smithsonian Magazine. Retrieved . Smith, J.B. et al. Ch. Vulnerability to Climate Change and Reasons for Concern A Synthesis. Extreme and Irreversible Effects. Sec .. Retrieved ., in IPCC TAR WG2 IPCC AR5 WG1 , Summary for Policymakers, Observed Changes in the Climate System, pp. Total radiative forcing is positive, and has led to an uptake of energy by the climate system. The largest contribution to total radiative forcing is caused by the increase in the atmospheric concentration of CO2 since . p. From to , CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion and cement production have released to GtC to the atmosphere, while deforestation and other land use change are estimated to have released to GtC. . World Population Historical Estimates of World Population. United States Census Bureau. December , . Retrieved . World Population Total Midyear Population for the World . Retrieved . Democide See various exclusions Charles Tilly . The politics of collective violence Cambridge University Press. ISBN . Gary Rodger Weaver . Culture, Communication, and Conflict. Simon Schuster. ISBN Suny , pp. , . Bozarslan, Duclert Kvorkian , p. . Sabet, Amr G. E. . A History of the Modern Middle East, 4th ed. American Journal of Islam and Society. . doi10.35632ajis.v27i1.. ISSN . McMahon, Henry Ali, Hussein Ibn , . British Diplomacy The HusseinMcMahon Letters, The World War I Reader, New York University Press, pp. , doi10.18574nyu9780814759332.., ISBN , retrieved The SykesPicot Agreement , The ArabIsraeli Conflict, Routledge, pp. , , doi10., ISBN , retrieved Osage are Richest People Greatest Per Capita Wealth in World Results From Oil Deal. The New York Times. ISSN . Retrieved . Brown, DeNeen L. October , . HBOs Watchmen depicts a deadly Tulsa race massacre that was all too real. Washington Post. Retrieved July , . White city police officer deputized members of the lynch mob and instructed them to get a gun and get a n, according to the Oklahoma Historical Society. Tulsa race massacre of Commission, Facts, Books. Britannica. Retrieved September , . The Palestinian Nakba, The Politics of Denial, Pluto Press, pp. , doi10.2307j.ctt18dztmq., retrieved VS . About the Nakba. Question of Palestine. Retrieved . How Palestinians were expelled from their homes, May , retrieved Geoffrey A. Hosking . Russia and the Russians a history. Harvard University Press. ISBN The Other Killing Machine. May , Jump up to a b Chinas great famine years later. British Medical Journal December Thee, Marek . The Indochina Wars Great Power Involvement Escalation and Disengagement. Journal of Peace Research. . Sage Publications . doi10.. JSTOR . S2CID . You saw it here first Pittsburghs Nickelodeon introduced the moving picture theater to the masses in . Pittsburgh PostGazette. June . Retrieved February . Jason Whittaker , The cyberspace handbook, Routledge, p. , ISBN Coates, James May , . How Mario Conquered America. Chicago Tribune. Archived from the original on November , . Retrieved February , . PlayStation Breaks Record as the Fastest Computer Entertainment Platform to Reach Cumulative Shipment of Million Units PDF Press release. Sony Computer Entertainment. November . Archived from the original PDF on January . Retrieved June . Giordano, Ralph G. Fun And Games In The Twentieth Century America A Historical Guide to Leisure. GreenWood Press. ISBN . Boyer, Carl B. A history of mathematics. Merzbach, Uta C., , Rogers D. Spotswood Collection. 2nd rev. ed.. New York Wiley. ISBN . OCLC . Devaney, Robert L. A first course in chaotic dynamical systems theory and experiment . printing. ed.. Reading, Mass. u.a. AddisonWesley. ISBN . Kenneth Appel Wolfgang Haken July . Every Planar Map is FourColorable. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society. Contemporary Mathematics. doi10.1090conm098. ISBN . S2CID . Thomson, Sir William . On the Age of the Suns Heat. Macmillans Magazine. . Jump up to a b c The Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine . NobelPrize.org. Nobel Media AB. Retrieved November , . Jump up to a b c d James Watson, Francis Crick, Maurice Wilkins, and Rosalind Franklin. Science History Institute. June . Archived from the original on March . Retrieved March . Engel, Pamela April , . Watch How Quickly The War On Drugs Changed Americas Prison Population. Business Insider. Global Positioning System History. Retrieved . Jacobson, Molly . Seventh Lambeth Conference, Resolutions by the Anglican Communion. Embryo Project Encyclopedia. Retrieved . IPCC AR5 WG1 , Stocker, T.F. eds., Climate Change The Physical Science Basis. Working Group WG1 Contribution to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change IPCC 5th Assessment Report AR5, Cambridge University Presscitation CS1 maint numeric names authors list link. Climate Change Working Group website. IPCC TAR WG2 . McCarthy, J. J. Canziani, O. F. Leary, N. A. Dokken, D. White, K. S. eds.. Climate Change Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. Archived from the original on May . Retrieved December .cite book CS1 maint numeric names authors list link pb Bozarslan, Hamit in French Duclert, Vincent in French Kvorkian, Raymond H. Comprendre le gnocide des armniens1915 nos jours Understanding the Armenian genocide to the present day in French. Tallandier fr. ISBN . Suny, Ronald Grigor . They Can Live in the Desert but Nowhere Else A History of the Armenian Genocide. Princeton University Press. ISBN . Brower, Daniel R. and Thomas Sanders. The World in the Twentieth Century 7th Ed, CBS News. People of the century. Simon and Schuster, . ISBN Grenville, J. A History of the World in the Twentieth Century . online free Hallock, Stephanie A. The World in the 20th Century A Thematic Approach Langer, William. An Encyclopedia of World History 5th ed. highly detailed outline of events online free Morris, Richard B. and Graham W. Irwin, eds. Harper Encyclopedia of the Modern World A Concise Reference History from to the Present online Pindyck, Robert S. What we know and dont know about climate change, and implications for policy. Environmental and Energy Policy and the Economy . online Pollard, Sidney, ed. Wealth and Poverty an Economic History of the 20th Century , pp global perspective online free Stearns, Peter, ed. The Encyclopedia of World History UNESCO . The Twentieth Century. History of Humanity. Vol. VII. Routledge. ISBN . The 20th Century Research Project archived February Slouching Towards Utopia The Economic History of the Twentieth Century archived February Discovering Literature 20th century at the British Library Millennia Centuries Decades Years Events Timeline Art Christianity Literature classical Philosophy Theatre State leaders Earthquakes Lunar eclipses Riots Solar eclipses Volcanic eruptions Category FAST United States2 France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel KulturNav 20th century 2nd millennium Late modern period 20thcentury overviews Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January Articles with unsourced statements from February CS1 maint numeric names authors list CS1 interwikilinked names CS1 Frenchlanguage sources fr Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on February , at UTC. Text is available under the Creative Commons AttributionShareAlike . License additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc., a nonprofit organization. Privacy policy Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Edit preview settings